OBSERVER EFFECT 

Consulted bibliography:

- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Observer_bias
- https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/nursing-and-health-professions/observer-bias

1) Can you talk to me about the observer effect Bias?

The observer effect, often referred to in the context of social sciences and psychology, pertains to the phenomenon where the presence or awareness of an observer influences the behavior or responses of those being observed. This effect can introduce bias into research findings because people may alter their behavior when they know they are being observed, consciously or subconsciously.



2) Can you create a user story based on this bias?

Once upon a time in the bustling city of Metroville, Detective Jack was assigned to lead a groundbreaking study on criminal behavior. Determined to unravel the complexities of urban crime, he devised a plan to conduct visible patrols in key areas known for criminal activity.

As Detective Jack embarked on his mission, he encountered a diverse cast of characters inhabiting the streets of Metroville. Among them was Sly Sam, a seasoned pickpocket with a knack for evading the law. Sly Sam was known for his cunning ways, always staying one step ahead of the authorities.

Unbeknownst to Sly Sam, Detective Jack's presence was about to shake up the status quo. With his keen eyes and unwavering determination, Detective Jack began his patrols, carefully observing the ebb and flow of activity in the city's darker corners.

However, as Detective Jack delved deeper into his investigation, he soon realized the insidious nature of the observer effect bias. Sly Sam, ever the elusive trickster, caught wind of Detective Jack's presence and swiftly adapted his tactics. Knowing that the police were on the prowl, Sly Sam and his cohorts became more cautious, laying low and avoiding their usual haunts.



3) Can you create an ontology based on the user story and the information you gave about the bias? (i want classes, object properties and individuals)

Classes:

Detective: Represents individuals like Detective Jack who are responsible for investigating crimes.
Criminal: Represents individuals involved in criminal activities, such as Sly Sam.
Patrol: Represents the act of conducting visible patrols in urban areas.
Urban Area: Represents the geographical location where criminal activities occur, like Metroville.
Observation: Represents the act of observing and gathering data on criminal behavior.
Behavior: Represents the actions and activities exhibited by individuals, including criminals and law enforcement officers.
Law Enforcement Officer: Represents individuals responsible for enforcing laws and maintaining public safety, like Detective Jack.
Object Properties:

conducts: Relates a Detective to the Patrol they conduct.
observes: Relates a Detective to the Observation they perform.
involves: Relates a Patrol to the Criminals involved in criminal activities.
takesPlaceIn: Relates a Criminal to the Urban Area where they operate.
influences: Relates the presence of law enforcement officers to the Behavior of Criminals.
Individuals:

Detective Jack: An instance of the class Detective.
Sly Sam: An instance of the class Criminal.
Visible Patrol in Metroville: An instance of the class Patrol conducted by Detective Jack in the urban area of Metroville.
Detective Jack's Observation: An instance of the class Observation performed by Detective Jack.
Criminal Activities in Metroville: An instance of the class Behavior exhibited by Sly Sam and other criminals in Metroville.
Law Enforcement Officers: An instance of the class Law Enforcement Officer, which includes Detective Jack.
Metroville: An instance of the class Urban Area where criminal activities take place.
This ontology captures the key entities, relationships, and instances relevant to the user story of Detective Jack's investigation into criminal behavior in Metroville.



4) Can you create competency questions based on this ontology (both in natural language and in sparql)?

What law enforcement officers are responsible for conducting visible patrols in the urban area of Metroville?

SELECT ?detective
WHERE {
  ?detective rdf:type :Detective ;
             :conducts ?patrol .
  ?patrol rdf:type :Patrol ;
          :takesPlaceIn :Metroville .
}
Which criminals are known to operate within the urban area of Metroville?

SELECT ?criminal
WHERE {
  ?criminal rdf:type :Criminal ;
            :takesPlaceIn :Metroville .
}

How does the presence of law enforcement officers influence the behavior of criminals during visible patrols in Metroville?

SELECT ?behavior
WHERE {
  ?behavior rdf:type :Behavior ;
            :involves ?criminal ;
            :involves ?patrol .
  ?patrol rdf:type :Patrol ;
          :takesPlaceIn :Metroville .
}

CRITICS

In this case, chatGPT's modelling was pretty accurate. During the process of facts-checking, i had to delete or modify some classes in order to give more compactness and uniformity to the ontology (for example i put patrol as a subclass of Observation because it encapsulates the act of observation done by the detective towards the criminal). In order to make everything more interoperable i used Framester to enrich my ontology with the IntentionallyAct entity. In addition to that i used the CoParticipation's ODP to indicate the coparticipation of the detective and the criminal in the Observation's Event (the detective is the agent and the criminal is the subject influenced by the act)

